Good afternoon.
Welcome to the Social Services Community Committee.
Uh, thank you for coming on this afternoon.
So, um, we have you for half an hour, so
what I might ask is if you would, um, introductory, uh,
comments, introduce yourselves
and, uh, from there we'll go to question.
Thank you very much for the welcome, Tina Kote.
I'm Kelly C***s, secretary for Woman
and Chief Executive of the Ministry for Women.
I'm Anna Charmers. I'm Deputy Secretary Engagement Policy
and Delivery for Ministry for Women.
Kylie Fletcher.
Um, Kylie Fletcher.
And I lead the crown response
for Thank you.
Would you like Yeah, please if you open statement.
Open statement, please. Great. Thank you.
Um, well, thank you for the opportunity
to be here this afternoon.
Um, we appreciate the time to talk to you about, um,
the previous 12 months.
Over this period, we have continued
to advance work on a number of key women, uh,
key issues for women.
We've led initiatives focusing on closing the gender pay
gap, addressing online harm,
supporting more women into governance and leadership.
We've also contributed to a range of policy processes,
including stalking our latest stock take on public sector
boards and committees show
that women's representation in public sector governance
remains strong with women holding 52.1%
of public sector board roles
and 44.5% of chair positions.
The gender pay gap continues to impact women
to support meaningful change.
We've launched the gender pay gap toolkit with businesses
and others that we work with in November
to provide a standardized calculator for,
to calculate the gender pay gap.
We've worked with more than 300
business leaders from across the country over this time
to both promote and roll out the toolkit.
And just over a week ago,
we Lynch launched the second iteration of the toolkit,
which brings in gender and ethnicity and gender disability.
We've also, um, provided more resources for small
and medium businesses who want to do work in this area
to support them with doing that.
And we've brought forward resources to amplify the voice
of young women in this process.
Another highlight has been, uh, launching the Free
to Lead initiative to support women
and their employers to engage online with confidence.
This was developed with NetSafe
and includes modules for both employers and for,
and for women to provide practical plans
and support so that women continue, um, engaging, lying
on your own terms.
Regarding women's health
and wellbeing, we have worked
to increase the awareness of women's health.
This includes, um, work
that we released in October on menopause
and perimenopause
with a focus on supporting women in workplaces.
We've continued to support claimant participation in the Man
Kopa inquiry alongside the Ang Tribunal
process, um, is underway in public hearings will continue
through 2026.
Our international work to promote
and, um, protect the rights of women
and girls has included New Zealand participation
participating in New Zealand's CAW examination
at the UN in Geneva in October 24.
Despite significant progress, challenges do remain
and I look forward to continuing to progress work
against all of our strategic priority areas
to realize our vision
that New Zealand is a pla great place for women and girls.
Thank you very much. Thank
You very much. Uh, first,
um,
Thank you so much for being here, um, on page 13
of the annual report, and thank you for that as well.
It talks about the MINISTERIALS priorities set
by the Minister for Women, which include
lifting women's income by addressing the gender pay gap
and supporting women into work.
So from your perspective, does the ministry consider
that the delay of 33 p equity claims affecting
around 150,000 women poses a risk
to achieving its economic empowerment, priority
to lift women's incomes
and potentially undermines related work programs such
as the gen gender pay gap toolkit that you've been, um,
celebrating today?
Women's trades initiatives
and support for labor market pathways and monitoring.
And I have a few side Aries as well. Thank you. Sure.
Thank you for the question.
Um, so women's economic empowerment, um, contains a number
of components and you've, um, touched on a number of them,
um, including pay equity, uh, the gender pay,
and a whole lot of other factors too,
including those pipelines of women into, um,
being represented right through organizations.
Um, the ministry wasn't involved in the pay equity work,
but we have been focused on the gender pay gap, um, in terms
of really supporting women's economic empowerment.
We've also been working with the retirement commissioner
on the retirement savings gap also, which is another,
it's sort of where it all culminates.
Mm-hmm. So we have been, um, very focused on, um,
what we can do to support, um, organizations, um,
calculating their gap, understanding it,
and then really importantly taking action.
Um, that has been our focus over the last 12 to 18 months.
Fantastic. So does the
ministry's current monitoring indicate that changes
to pay equity progress could slow
or reverse gains in closing gender pay gaps?
Are you monitoring that?
Uh, we are not, um, currently monitoring that in terms of,
um, but we, we do, um, we'll await
with interest when claims do come through,
but what we do monitor is, um, the gender pay gap in terms
of, um, the reporting that Stats New Zealand does.
Mm-hmm. So that has been in place since 1998.
Um, so we've got a pretty good time series of that now.
Um, our current level, um,
at the national level is 5.2%.
Mm-hmm. We are
however interested in getting beneath that number as well.
So another thing that we do is look to, um, understand
what the pay gap is for Wni Maori, for Pacific Women,
and for other, um, groups of women,
including disabled women.
So we, we come at things from that perspective
as well in terms of what we are monitoring
and how we are seeing that flow through to, um, change.
So has, thank you. Um, that sounds great.
Does, has the ministry provided any advice
or analysis
to the minister outlining the potential consequences
for women's economic security arising from the changes
to pay equity claims?
Uh, um, as I touched on earlier, our, our main
contribution here in terms
of we women's economic empowerment has been really focused
on the pay gap
and we do provide, um, analysis and breakdown.
Um, we know that this, um,
that this measure has been quite stuck since 2020, sorry,
since 2017.
The gender pay gap at the national level has been really
sticky, and that was one of the main reasons, um, I guess
that there was the parliamentary inquiry into pay
transparency back in 20 21, 22.
From that, there's been quite a lot
of work underway in this space
and why we wanted to do something to really sort
of get into change here.
Um, so the, the two most recent data points in terms
of looking at the gender pay gap globally, um,
when the current number is 5.2, the year before was 8.2.
So it's a three percentage point drop, which is, um,
a significant it is and one data point.
So we do await with interest to see
what the next one will be.
Mm-hmm. Um, so it, so it's sort
of understanding what's been going on through there
that's driven that change.
Yeah. That's also, I've just got one
more supplementary Thank you.
You, and so you are confident with
what the ministry is doing within its existing mandate
to mitigate or highlight the risks, these changes pose
to women's long term income and economic wellbeing? Yeah,
So what we are viewing, um,
women's economic empowerment holistically, um,
and, um, for example, another area
that we are interested in is the fact
that women are currently getting 3% of the pie in terms of,
um, um, invest investment into new businesses despite, um,
their businesses being successful.
So that again, speaks to opportunities to, um,
advance women's economic, um, wellbeing
and, um, empowerment.
We've got the PA parts of that picture
that we are focused on,
and other government agencies are making their contribution
in other areas as well.
Thank you. I thought
Yeah, sure. What was asked. Yeah,
sure.
Um, just on the gender pay gap, um,
what analysis has the ministry done on how much of
that reduction in the pay gap is due to, uh,
collective agreements and pay equity settlements? Mm.
That's something that we haven't fully unpicked.
I think it's fair to say that there's a range
of factors at play there
and also, um, how the pay equity settlements have been, um,
impacting on that over time, rather than just this
last data point.
We do know that over the most recent period, one
of the changes, um, that came through in those numbers was
that the median, um, increase, um,
for men was much smaller than the increase for women in the,
uh, median earnings over that time, which led to, um,
the closing of the gap. So then are
You intending to do an analysis to,
to work out why there was, why there was a, a,
a shift in the gender pay gap?
Uh, y yes. Um,
and we'd have to, um, draw on the, um, the, the input
of other agencies, including Stats New Zealand.
Um, it, I think it is worth reiterating
that this is one data point.
So, um, over that time series, since 98,
we have seen a couple of periods of, um, decline.
There have also been, um, a couple of periods
where the gender pay gap has gone back up, like I said,
since 2017, that the key standout feature has been
that it just got a bit stuck.
So this, the gap,
the most recent data coming down is positive,
but it is that one data point.
So we need to see what will happen from there.
Um, going back to the original question posed
around pay equity that KA put, when we had your
minister here last time, she confirmed,
and I think you've reiterated that she never sought
advice from the Ministry for Women on pay equity changes.
Um, given that she didn't ask you this question, I will, um,
do you agree with the Minister for Women
and some of the other ministers
that the government's pay equity changes
are fairer for women?
I think that that's, um, a question, um, for my minister.
I, we haven't been,
You've got a level of expertise on pay equity, um,
and we're really grateful that your ministry has that.
So clearly you would have an evidence base and,
and important experience and insights.
Mm-hmm. So my question to you is, is as the lead
of the agency, are the changes there are,
I I do, um, acknowledge that this is a, a topic
where there are a range of views.
Um, I have, um, listened to, um, many
of those viewpoints of women leaders,
women's organizations expressed through the, um,
the People Select committee process into pay equity.
Um, and I'm connected into a range of groups who, um,
speak to that, speak to us about that
and their perspectives.
My focus really has been on what is the ministry, um,
for women that we can do, um, um, given the,
our mandate in terms of, um, we not being part
of the pay equity, um, changes that we're seen through,
but what we can do on the other side of the equation
to get the results that we all want,
which is women's economic empowerment.
Okay. One more s to that
and, um, you know,
just a little bit concerned, that was quite a vague answer,
but, you know, also concerned that according
to the public service census, only 54%
of your staff feel you are free
and frank in your advice to ministers.
Yeah. Were you free
and frank in your advice on pay equity, uh,
even though it would've been after the fact
'cause the announcement and decisions were made without your
input, were you free and,
and Frank with your advice on pay equity
and what was that advice?
Um, our focus,
um, has not, I guess, been looking back
and retrospective on that.
We've wanted to focus on what we can do
to support women's economic empowerment.
We've got the opportunity in the space of, um,
gender pay gap reporting, uh, working
with the retirement commission, working
with others on other aspects
that have the same outcome in terms
of our economic wellbeing.
And that's where we've put our effort.
So no advice no from you on pay equity to the minister?
Not since that decision was made. No.
Well, I a supplement from the pay gap, actually, sort of
what you were saying earlier, because, um,
I think the records of go back to 1998 is, as you said, um,
and, uh, the last sort of four this year is it's prop to,
uh, 5.2% that gender pay gap, which, um, my understanding
that's the lowest it's ever been since Rickles began
back in 1998.
Um, and, and you, you talked a little bit
before about, you know, you don't have all the analysis as
to why that is, but it, it, so are there any, um, indicators
that you've had yet about, you know, why it's dropped
to the last, it's been since 19 nine? Yeah,
So, um, we think
that there's a few different things going on.
Um, the pay equity settlements will be part of that,
as they would've been in previous data points as well.
Um, the, the fact that men's median earnings, the rate
of increase was quite small, um,
and women's media earnings over that period was, um, um,
quite a lot larger.
There's also, um, the work that businesses
and organizations have had underway
for some time now about pay gap reporting,
pay transparency more broadly.
Um, so for example, the champions for Change,
a grouping of around, um, 80 chief executives
and board chairs covering about 160,000 people.
Uh, they have been reporting on this for,
for quite a long time now.
And also a whole range of other organizations
that we connected with, um, are also stepping towards, um,
being more transparent about their pay gaps, um,
taking action, um, to address them if they have them.
Um, and that's part of the work we've been doing, um,
over the course of this year as we've looked
to implement this.
Um, so I think it's a number of things, um, coming together.
Um, when we look internationally, our, um,
gender pay gap is, um, is quite low.
I think we are fifth in the OECD,
but that's based on 2023 data.
So it might have shifted a bit further since then.
Um, but there's still more to go.
And as I touched on earlier, um, different groups of women,
um, are their rates, their gender pay gaps are much higher,
and that's what we want to keep focusing on as well.
And related to that last year, um,
release the first government, um,
back gender pay gap calculator
or who are wanting to address this, um, what have you,
what have you seen in the period in review in terms
of the uptake of that and,
and what, if any, difference making?
There's quite a lot of momentum behind the work.
So, um, a big, um,
a big ask from the business sector was they wanted a
standardized approach,
which is why we developed the calculator.
So it really helps simplify what gets included
and who gets included.
So that's taken away quite a big barrier.
Um, and, um, it's, it also means that organizations are able
to make comparisons, um, uh, with their peers
or across sectors, which again, is something
that they've wanted to do.
So that really enables them to do that.
We've also had interest from small and medium enterprises.
Our guidance is that you need to have at least 10 men
or 10 women, um, in order to report publicly.
It doesn't mean that you can't do the work, um,
within your business and use it, but,
but in terms of protecting people's privacy,
you can't publish it.
But I think that that level of interest again, um, speaks
to the fact that a number of organizations, um,
not just large ones,
but also smaller ones are wanting to do this.
A number of them speak about the impact
that it has on the organizational performance, um,
and the difference that it's making to them.
Um, and their, their success
Was encouraging. Um,
I've
Got primary, I wanna really come back to this issue
of the decision being made in the middle
of the year you weren't consulted.
I understand that it's difficult,
but what have you done this year to make sure
that you are measuring the impact of
that particular decision?
Because that is your role.
You are the guardrails, you are the advocate.
So what have you, what have you got in place to make sure
that next year when we look at it, we know
what impact that has had?
Um, this is something that, um, the Minister
for Women's National Advisory Council on Employment Outcomes
for Women, um, have been speaking with the minister about,
and it's something that in the context of their work
that they might be providing advice to her on.
Also, um, as I've said, um, at the ministry, we will be, um,
um, continuing to, uh, work with mb, um, as required,
but also to keep, um, oversight of, um, settlements
or, um, applications that come through this process.
Any question, ma? Oh, yes. Thank you. Um, is this
A software primary? Primary?
Oh, I've got a primary too.
I thought I was after Kahu. Oh, I'd ask sub.
You have had, uh, six sub I I'll,
I'll come back to you after this one. Okay.
Um, I'd like to come to the, um, leadership
and governance role,
and particularly the outcome that we've seen
with exceeding the target.
We are now 52.1% in the public sector.
Um, have you got any plans
or strategies of, so that
that can be translated into the private sector as well?
Thank you. And yes, we do.
So, um, it's the fifth consecutive year in the public sector
that, that we've now been at 50% or above.
Um, we've got, um, the public, the private sector, sorry, is
around, um, 36% or, or so.
Um, we've had conversations with a number
of leaders in the private sector,
and there is, um, interest in commitment in working with us
to have a focus on that.
So that's gonna be a key focus for, for us from, from now
through till next year.
Um, we've been meeting with the IOD
and others to, um, think about what steps we can take
to support, um, aspirations in the private sector
to lift that number.
We are also, um, working on, um, a refresh
and update of the nomination service that we offer, which is
where we sort of almost, um, provide an opportunity
for women to express their interest in governance roles.
They come on our database,
and we then share with them different opportunities
that are available to them.
So we are also looking at ways in which, um, that resource
that we have could potentially be used more broadly
to support women in leadership, be it in the private sector,
the public sector, or the non-government sector.
All of it makes a difference in terms of women's, um,
representation and empowerment.
Thank you. Yeah.
Um, so, uh,
I think it was the 8th of October actually on the Pacific
Media Network interview that the Prime Minister
ruled out a potential merger or,
or disestablishment of, of the ministry for Pacific Peoples.
Um, and just wanting to check, does a potential merger
also exclude the ministry from women, women, the Ministry
for Women, um, being merged?
Yes, it does. So there was no plan prior
to the 8th of October to merge the ministry, um,
with a number of other population group agencies.
Uh, so, um, myself
and my colleagues from, um, the Ministry for Pacific Peoples
and the Ministry for Ethnic Communities as, um, a group
of three ces, we were asked by the Public Service Commission
to, um, provide them with some information.
Um, so we, um, worked collaboratively to, um, to do that.
Um, there was one, um, report that talked about, um,
you know, for each organization, our background, what we do,
how we do it, and then there was another piece of work
that looked up, um, at a continuum of options,
essentially from the status quo through to different, um,
different, um, options, um, including mergers
or bringing different bits of organizations together.
When, when we were thinking about that well, um,
and we were asked to do that
and to think about what options could look like, key drivers
for that work was around, um, you know, a key part
of our role is how we bring the voices
of women to the table.
So that was something that was front of mind.
Um, also, um, how we can, um, continue to drive
and leverage impact, uh, our ambition is high and broad,
and so we are really wanting to, to, to be, um, mindful of
how we can make that happen.
And also thinking about sustainability.
Um, so they were things
that we thought about as part of that,
Is there a plan to merge the population group agencies
or disestablish the Ministry for Women next term?
And are you doing work towards that now?
Um, what I've been advised by, um,
the Public Services Commission, um,
and actually through, through the media, through the media
that you referenced, is that there is no, no, no, no work,
nothing happening, um, at this point.
And no, I'm not doing any, um, work on that currently.
So, um, in terms of, um, some of the documents
and answers that, that you've given, um,
around this particular issue, according
to the minister's answers to written questions,
you initiated a discussion
with her on the 10th of September, 2025,
about the future of the ministry.
Uh, can you tell us what prompted the discussion and whether
or not any of that discussion included a potential merger
or a disestablishment of the ministry for women?
No, I, um, if I, um, recall correctly, I don't have the,
um, timeline, um, in front of me,
but I think that discussion was following, um, a meeting
that my minister had with the Public Service Commission.
It was a meeting that I wasn't at,
so I think I was just looping back into her, um,
looping back, um, with her after that meeting. Okay.
So final question.
You've said that there's absolutely no intention
to merge the Ministry for women
or disestablish it next term?
Uh, no, that's not what I've said,
that they're not decisions for me.
Um, they are decisions
for the Public Service Commission in terms of the machinery
of government, just
To understand. So you
haven't been part
of any discussions to do those things?
Um, we've, we
provided advice, uh, sorry, not,
it wasn't advice, it was information.
We provided information to the Public Service Commission on,
um, kind of background to our ministries, what we do,
how we operate, and we were also asked to think about, um,
different options on a continuum.
Um, I've been advised that there is nothing happening, um,
on this, um, in this term of government,
and I'm not doing any work on it. I
Was asking that next term, uh,
That not, I haven't been advised of any,
anything with that regard.
All I've heard is what you've repeated
that you heard in the media.
Um, but, um,
We've done a lot of work in economically local and so on.
And one of the things that comes
through internationally strongly is that regardless of
what level women in entrepreneurship is one
of the key sources of increasing that, both generally
for women's empowerment,
but also for the communities they work in
and the sectors they work in.
So I was a little disappointed when I saw that, um,
we weren't really getting the investment into some
of our entrepreneurs that we should be getting.
So can you, um, please sort of outline to us
what those challenges seem to be
and what the opportunities may be to up the ante?
Yes. Um, thank you for that question.
Well, it, it does seem that getting 3% of that pie, um,
yeah, it, it's not, um, where we wanna be.
And I think for the entrepreneurs, the women, it's not what,
where they want things to be at either.
So we've, we've sort of at the point
of starting some conversations with, um, groups, um,
working in this space, including the Ministry of Awesome
that has the focus on women entrepreneurs, um,
and really starting to think about how we can unpack
what some of the barriers are.
I think a really good thing is
that this number is out there now that people are aware
of it, um, that that's something that's being, uh, watched
and monitored and getting a conversation going.
Um, but we are really keen to work with others
to free up the space.
Um, like you, you, the point you made too is
that we know from research that women led organizations,
well, firstly, they, um, often have small agenda pay gaps.
So, um, that's one thing that they do,
but also they, um, are great at bringing in
and promoting women within their organization.
So I think it ticks a lot of boxes
and it's something that we wanna do
more work on in the year ahead. Mm-hmm.
So The quick stop on that one.
Do you think the, um, any policy around, um,
commercializing university, uh, research
will make a difference for women in that space?
That's something, um, to completely honest,
be completely honest that I haven't, um,
thought a lot of about.
Um, but we could come back to you, um, in writing, if
that was, um, would be helpful. Mm-hmm.
It Would. Great. Thank
You. I've
got supplement on this as well.
Just do you think,
or who would be turning their mind of anyone
to the opportunities for women lead entrepreneurship in
this, um, new era of, you know, artificial intelligence,
which sort of as flattens the rugby in a lot of ways.
There's a lot of sectors actually. Yeah. Mm-hmm.
As, as the, any anyone sort of turning that sort
of opportunity Yeah.
For administrator, sort of a partner with anyone on that, in
that space to encourage, you know, the growth
and in women entrepreneurship.
Yeah, I think you're right that
that's, um, really important.
And, um, there's a range of players, um,
or people leading out in this area.
So what, what we, um, tend
to do on issues like this is really looking to, um,
connect people, bring people together, um,
to support good work that's already going on,
but also to understand how we at the ministry can support
and amplify address any barriers
that they may be experiencing.
So we are really up to that part of this piece of work,
and we will be working with a range of leaders, um,
across a range of sectors to take that forward.
So hopefully, um, in 12 months time,
we'll be back here talking to you about the progress
that collaboratively we are making.
And I might just, um, take the option
for another supplementary sort of, kind, related as, um,
for example, the president of engineering New Zealand is,
is a woman bit noisy, the, the president
of engineering New Zealand is a woman, for example,
you know, I was visiting a John Kong.
Yeah. And I was, I was visiting, visiting a,
an amazing little engineering firm,
and recently, uh, producing a lot of, um,
well world leading, um, products for, you know,
space companies, um, also lead by, you know,
female leadership team.
Um, so it's just,
I know this is expanding these opportunities
and how, how are those stories?
Or is there, is there a process for,
to get those stories out more broadly?
Yeah, so, so a lot more young girls can see themselves
having these opportunities going forward. Yeah.
So across our, um, work program, we've actually been, um,
building in, um, opportunities for women
to hear directly from women, um, themselves.
So we've done that with our gender pay gap work.
Um, we've got, in that case, it's sort of, um, a range
of employers, um,
and also members of, uh, of organizations speaking about
what, what's happening there.
Um, it, it does include, um, a body that covers both,
um, engineers and architects
because we really wanting to show, um, a full range
of opportunities out there.
And we know that in the STEM area, um, the number of women
who are in the engineering
and math, mathematics end isn't the same
as the part of the STEM equation.
So we are really wanting to showcase, you know,
that I think the, the, like, the message
around you can't be, what you can't see is really important
here to, so to, to show those.
And also there's some, um, men, uh, demonstrating, um,
great leadership also in organizations
and bringing women, um, uh, into, um, the pipeline
of future leaders, including in the engineering space.
Um, also on our online harm work, we've got a series
that we've called Beyond the Keyboard, where again,
women can hear directly from women
who have experienced online harm, to hear their stories of
how they navigated through that.
And also, um, throughout all those stories is, is a message
of encouragement
and to keep going, to keep being visible,
to own your space, to have your voice.
And the feedback we get is
that hearing directly from people does make a difference.
We've got, um, aspirations to continue with the, um,
the opportunity for people to hear
and see from, um, people who look like them, including for,
um, young women, but older women as well.
Um, there's a, a range of issues, um, that we need
to come from, from different perspectives
and to pl amplify those voices
and so that, um, the communities that we are here
to serve can see themselves in our work.
Right. I listening with a lot of interest, um,
and it, it, 'cause you refer to free to lead,
it doesn't always feel that free, right?
Um, but it is still a, a thing.
And so I, I wanted to go to that in the context of Maori.
Um, so just in terms of that, that, um,
what program, yeah,
let's, I'll just go straight to the question.
What program or plan targets do you have?
Um, in terms of, um, measurable improvements
for wa Maori, um, living rural
is the, is the focus, but rural
and access to those opportunities.
Um, because in the report there, definitely in terms
of the evidence, there was some gaps in that way.
So I'd be keen to just get a little bit more from you
and a little bit, it even relates to David's,
what's question, interestingly enough, um,
because just, well, I mean,
'cause these ends, eh, these ends and, um, and, and I,
and as I'm listening to the conversation about free to lead
as a, as a concept and a plan in your business,
and yet part of even here is like, how free are we
to lead, right?
Mm-hmm. So, um, I, I, yeah, that's Mr.
Chair, just, I just wanted to Yeah, thank you.
Please make what you want to
that question I'm interested to hear.
Um, please let me know if I'm, um, not, um,
addressing the, the, the, the heart
of the issues that you're raising.
But through our work, we've, um,
so we've got four strategic po
and through all of those, um, a key lens that we bring, uh,
outcomes for wahine Maori, so in our governance, governance
and leadership work, part of that is, um, being very clear
and transparent in reporting how many Waine Maori, uh,
are on our public sector boards and committees.
Um, it's between 14
and 15% of all, um, seats around those tables currently.
And it's something that we monitor
and re we report on annually.
Um, so that visibility and that clarity is really important.
Um, again, in terms of the gender pay gap, the, the,
the kind of national average is currently 5.2%.
The gender pay gap for wah Maori is 12%.
That is something that we will keep reporting on,
giving it the visibility, keep tracking it.
Um, and, um, we've also, um, undertaken research,
this was a couple of years ago now,
but, um, it looked at the wa Maori economy, so
to really understand, um, you know, key points
of difference there and, um, to get those insights
and understandings
to take forward into our broader work program.
And that sort of linking through to the point raised earlier
around, um, women entrepreneurs and women business owners,
and we know that they work differently
and bring a different mindset to supporting, um, women
their whanau and how they operate.
So that's something we wanna keep, um, a focus on.
Um, and we also have our wah Maori COPA inquiry work,
which is a key foundation of our work program also.
Yeah, no, cool.
I, um, so I, I can hear, you know, the, um,
the increasing number of wahine and public on boards, right?
And it's governance sports,
and there the bigger boards you might say,
but you, you know what I mean?
I'm just, I can see probably a dozen working there now
who are on those Maori committees.
And if you can handle a Maori committee,
you can handle any public sector board.
And, and I mean, it's a giggle,
but there's something in that science, right?
Which, which, and it's
because the worlds are sadly, I think so separate that
that science is not understood well enough.
And I think probably even an access from the, your ministry
that, um, that can realize
that potential not take it anywhere.
In fact, it probably is
because not everybody's suited to a, a, a, you know, a a
a governance board in the way in which we are discussing
now, but they are more than suitable for that board.
But I wouldn't say that people on a governance public sector
board would actually handle
a board back in the car, you see?
So there's, there's, and,
and so what I'm, what I'm testing here is the,
is the real understanding of where the science power and um,
and credibility really works.
'cause it isn't, it cannot be the same 'cause it isn't.
And so I wanna, why am I talking about this?
Because I think it's important
to understand it in the course of your work.
Mm-hmm. And, um,
and more of it needs to be understood, I think in, in a
much more di dig and dive deeper.
'cause I think those things, when they get joined up,
that's when you get power up.
Mm. That, that's when I think we can power up as a nation.
And I, yeah, I wanted to put those two.
Thank you for that. And, um, in thinking about our free
to lead, um, work, um, you know, leadership takes
a range of forms and happens in a range of places.
So it's not, um, leadership of organizations
or political processes.
It's actually a women in their communities
as you touched on, and the roles that they play there.
Um, and we are really conscious that, um, there is, um,
a gender overlay of online harm, um,
which I think unfortunately, um, many
of you in the room today will have experienced.
And when, um, for Wni Maori for women of color, um,
it's exacerbated further.
So, um, we've, um, worked with women who have, um,
a public profile who were prepared
to talk about their experiences,
but hopefully it will connect with, um,
anyone in our community who is maybe, um, not wanting
to put themselves forward at this point onto the school
boards of trustees or a community board
because they're not sure if it's worth it, uh, in terms of
what they'll, um, have to potentially manage.
Hopefully they won't,
but we don't want their ambition, um, their contribution
to be stifled, um,
because it shouldn't be, we, we should be able to engage
with confidence and be safe.
And that's what we are gonna continue to work through
with NetSafe and others. Thank
You. Just one final,
it isn't, I'm,
I'm not only talking about this in terms of mm-hmm.
When things go bad. So it's not in the deficit context
that I'm raising this.
Um, it would be, you'd be hard pushed to go to a, uh,
and find, um,
and be able to contest with the aunties the whole component
of what is called the auntie's world.
'cause they're unbeatable and, and, and not
because of the harm
and the deficit stuff that we can often, I think come from,
but the greatest things that can occur.
So they're proactive.
The number of Maori women
and businesses that came out in COVID were outstanding.
We knew that in, and,
and so I think in the affirmative there is more
to understand and benefit from.
I think. So anyway, so Mr. The chance. That's enough.
Thank you. Um,
so we are hearing from community organizations about the
delay with the long term insights briefing.
Um, that consultation ran from November to December in 2024.
Um, and the ministry did direct, um,
engagement with stakeholders.
So we, we know that this hasn't been finalized
and we haven't heard anything about it.
So can you explain why the 2025 long term insights briefing
has not yet been finalized or published as planned
because of No, the ministry intended to share a draft
for public consultation mid 2025.
So it is quite delayed what challenges
or obstacles the ministry has faced in completing it
and how these delays might affect the ministry's ability
to provide timely evidence-based advice to the minister,
which you weren't able to do with the pay equity
and subsequently haven't done to inform government policy
and support stakeholders working
to improve the lives of women and girls.
Mm-hmm. I have a few supplementaries as well.
Thank you for that. Um, so, um,
we do have the work underway
and, um, I might hand over, um, to Kylie
or Anna on this one just
to give you a bit more detail about when our current, um,
date that we are working towards is.
And obviously this connects in really importantly
to the broader work around, um, online harm prevention and,
and women making the contribution in these spaces.
Thanks. Yeah.
We've been working on this piece of work for a little while,
and one of the things that's really important, just
because of the fast moving pace of online, we really wanted
to get the voices of young women
and get that engagement piece really, really right.
So we've spent the last, um,
brief period just once we listened to our community groups
and really wanted, um,
there's no point looking at the pipeline
of future leaders if we don't have those
voices really strong.
So we've now completed that piece of work
and we're actually just in the
finalization stage of the report.
So it shouldn't be too far.
My hope is that I would love to get it done this,
this side of Christmas.
Um, but I think we are one of a number
of government agencies sitting here wanting
to make these pieces of work the best that they can be.
And, um, there are, there are others that are also with us.
It is a case of making sure that
what we have we can use into the future.
And I think the work we've taken to do over the last couple
of months will put us in a good place for that.
Awesome. Um, just a supplementary on that.
So during that consultation period, what steps were taken
with stakeholders and have any of the issues
that were raised contributed to the delay in publishing?
Or was it just purely around the changes
and fast moving changes of the internet and ai? Yeah,
Pretty much the latter.
Um, I mean, the issues that were raised in our consultation,
we were fairly familiar with,
and a lot of them fed into our free to lead toolkit.
That was the great advantage of those two pieces of work.
Mm-hmm. And why we wanted to dovetail them so
that we could take the findings from the engagement
and really build that toolkit based on what we were hearing.
So we sort of feel like in some ways it has
delivered some of the work.
But I think the second part was, um,
more about making sure we had
that really firm voices of young women.
We wanted that to be done in a safe and secure way.
We've, we have interviewed, um, groups of young women
because essentially that is the pipeline
of future women leaders.
And that's actually where, where we are concerned, you know,
if these impacts are to flow down
and to put people off standing for public office
or other roles, um,
that's something we really need to be concerned about.
So we wanna make sure we've got strong advice in that space.
Mm-hmm. And so has the ministry assessed whether the
delays, um, affect coordination with other agencies
or government programs
that rely on insights from the L two IB?
Um, a big part of the ministry is stewardship
and advocating for wahine,
and we've seen, um, the disappointment
of women across New Zealand that that wasn't, um,
and you weren't given that opportunity with the pay equity,
so, and how that coordination
with other agencies just wasn't there,
like completely not there.
And even, um, afterwards, still not there.
So do you think that there is any, um, yeah,
how the delays will affect that coordination
with other, other agencies? Yeah,
Our stakeholders are really important to us,
so we actually have a lot to do with all
of the groups involved in this work.
We meet regularly with International Women's Caucus
and others, and I think the ones that we have talked
to most recently and most closely on
that we're still in regular contact with.
So in that regard, we're, we're really confident.
Um, but yeah, I understand it is important.
Obviously we want, when people share with us, we need
to make sure that we keep them updated and guided.
So we'll be going back to them very soon with the, the
Draft supplementary.
Thank you. Are, are there any risks
that key policy decisions could be made without the guidance
of the long-term insights briefing due to the delay?
And how is the ministry managing those risks?
I don't believe there are any real risks to this.
I think the most important thing is to get that, um,
that guidance, right?
To be really clear on that voice.
And, um, that's what we're taking the time to do. So
We potentially, we'll go into urgency again.
We know that, um, the pay equity went through,
we were advised about it, it went through all in one day.
If that, if something like that happened again that
affected women and
before this long-term insights briefing came out,
you don't see any, have any concerns that, um, they, that
we wouldn't be able to rely on the strategy to show,
um, evidence-based approaches for women?
Yeah, I mean, the long-term insights briefing is more
around that listening piece and that recording piece
and putting out a piece of non-government advice.
It's not, there's not a huge, like policy focus.
I mean, there are areas of recommendation,
but the reason that it was sort of established was
to provide an independent vehicle outside of government
to do a piece of work
where we thought it was important and could have impact.
So mm-hmm. With those, with that perspective, I'm,
I'm pretty confident in that. Thank
You. Any
Question coming? Yeah. Um,
on unemployment, um,
so your annual reports list two of your strategic priorities
for 2024 and 25.
It's economic empowerment,
and you've spoken to that a little bit before for women, um,
and social and economic wellbeing for women.
Um, however, what we've seen in the past two years is
unemployment for women has increased from four 2% in the
September 20, 23 quarter to 5.5, uh,
5.4% in September, 2025 quarter.
Um, so what work is your ministry undertaking,
or what advice is the ministry giving the government on how
to get more women back into the workforce?
So, um, I guess, um, overlaying that it is a time
where the unemployment rate more generally has gone up,
but you've touched on, um, what the statistics are for, um,
women, um, or the rates of unemployment.
So we are part of, um, a group that works with, um,
the Ministry of Social Development, um, MB
and others with a focus on the labor market.
Um, and, um, particular areas that we've been focused on in
that context include, um, supporting the development of the,
um, um, the, um,
the e um, employment development action plan, um,
that was led by MB
and also we've had a focus on, um, people in needs.
We are part of regular meetings as part of that
and including, um,
and ensuring that the regular reporting that comes through,
um, includes gender and ethnic breakdowns.
We report, um,
and monitor the HLEE data on a regular basis
to look at ongoing trends,
and we work with colleagues on that.
What happened to the Women's Employment Action Plan?
Uh, what happened to the Women's Employment Action Plan
was, um, it, it, um, was managed in the same way
as the other employment action plans,
where it's all come together into one overarching, um, um,
employment action plan.
That is one that's led out by mb
but they work across the system in terms of the,
the milestones and the drivers within that. So
Were all of the actions from the previous Women's
Employment Action Plan carried over to the overall new, um,
all encompassing employment action plan,
Um, that was managed through, um, through the process
MB led to bring those all together.
Did you, so it sits in into one,
Did you get to provide advice on that?
Um, it happened some time ago, so I can't, um, remember
with clarity if we did,
but I'm, I imagine
that we would have been part of that process.
And do you think, um, in terms of
women's employment that, um,
a specific targeted employment action plan is more effective
or one being big, all encompassing,
um, employment action plan?
Well, that, that was a decision that the government made,
that it wanted to bring them all together, um,
into one plan.
And so our work is to, um, support that.
Um, as you've heard me talk about quite a lot,
there are other particular things that we are working on
to contribute to that.
Um, and like I say, one of the things
that we also do is monitor the data as it's coming out so
that we can understand, um, the overlay of, um, in terms of,
um, what that means for women.
And we also look to see what it looks like
for specific groups of women.
So, for example, we know that young women,
and they're not an employment education
and training, um, that, um, that they can have a lot
of challenges and barriers to accessing the labor market.
So we are really wanting to understand quarter by quarter
what that is looking like for them.
Oh, that's good. 'cause that leads into my other stuff,
which is whether
or not the ministry has done analysis
for whether there are specific trends for those women
who have lost jobs over the last two years.
So you said that some work has been done on young women.
Has it been done on Maori Pacific?
Um, women, disabled women
and women from ethnic communities as well, given
that we know that there's disparities there? Yeah,
So, um, that's part of what we are doing as part of this,
um, broader collective that we are involved in.
I'm involved in a grouping and Anna is also,
and it's really bringing those lenses to the analysis
to understand, um, what's happening there for some of those.
Um, NB have quite a strong role
and we are there working with them, supporting them,
understanding what that looks like
and thinking about that, how, how that feeds through.
Um, the minister also, the Minister for Women
through her NCU forum, has the opportunity
to hear from those members about
what they're seeing in the communities that they represent.
Um, there's also a, a range of NCU partner organizations.
Um, so we are able to feed up through those, um, layers
to get different perspectives of, um, what's happening
for women in communities in terms of their employment.
Okay. Um, my supplementary is, first of all,
you've got a strong underuse of women, so 4%
more than men and very different factors coming in.
And you are really the only body that's got that lens.
Um, I wanna know what you are doing in that space,
especially if you are having to take it into another
ministry like you are.
I just wanted to give you one example I found when I was
doing my work on restraints of trade.
The women, if you ban restraints of trade,
women's wages go up double the amount of men
now they're not something that you see
unless you are looking at the agreements and looking closely
and you're looking at through that lens.
What sort of work are you doing on the factors
that are going into the under utilization that are,
that are new, that mean we've got that drag?
What sort of work are you doing in that space that, and,
and how are you getting under the boot
In terms of, um, labor market outcomes for women?
Um, we, we've got a role to play, as do other agencies.
And so we are working on it collectively
and collaboratively with them.
So for example, um, MSD will have a range
of employment programs available to, um, its clients.
Um, they do a lot of analysis in terms of the uptake
of different groups into them.
Um, so that, um, could be women out of employment
or who are underutilized and want more employment.
Um, obviously, um, the, the role for the ministry is not
to deliver those kind of programs,
but what we do do is feed in our insights, um,
and what we hear from the view communities that we represent
and also understand
and analyze the data
that other agencies share on their programs,
how effective they are, what impact they're having.
So that's a contribution that we make to that.
What is supplementary?
You got obviously the four strategic priorities.
Um, what, um, key indicators of economic
and social, um, progress for women
and girls are you tracking
to assess against those strategic prie priorities?
Many of, or many, if not all of which need to be delivered
by other agencies or sectors or,
or businesses or community groups?
Yeah,
So, um, I guess at, um, the MAP protocol, there are the,
um, statistics that come out of Stats New Zealand,
which includes the HLEE data,
which is available on a quarterly basis.
Um, there's also the reporting
that they do on an annual basis.
So they are the things that we, um, track and monitor.
Um, and, um, we also, I guess keep abreast
of other key indicators that agencies report on themselves
in terms of the outcomes of the populations
that they are there to serve.
We have been, um, I guess, um, quite unashamedly, um,
focused on our strategic priorities that have been agreed
with our minister.
Um, I think for a ministry like ours, um, the Ministry
for Women, if we spread ourselves too thinly across
everything, um, it will be really difficult
to speak about the impact we have
and what difference we are making.
Part of our role is to contribute
to broader government processes to contribute
to system change within government.
And also we've got a role to, to lead
and deliver, work ourselves on, um, work
that's gonna shift the dial, um,
for outcomes for women and girls.
So for each of our four strategic priorities,
we have specific projects that do that.
And then we also contribute to cross system work.
Do does any of your data feed into the IDI or vice versa?
No. Okay. Thanks.
Thank you. Uh, just a supplementary on this.
So the current performance measured are
largely activity based.
Yeah. And, um, so how does the ministry
evaluate whether it's interventions
and activities are producing tangible
outcomes rather than just outputs?
I think, um, um, that's a fear observation
and something that continues to be a work on, um, for us.
And I don't think we are on our own in that.
Um, so, uh, we've been working really hard to get to,
um, a set of performance indicators that real, really tell
that story of what, what we are doing
and the impact that we are having.
So our current set of performance measures are our best, um,
um, go at that.
But it's not that we are stopping there.
Um, we've also had some additional targets, um, set
by the Minister for Women
and specifically, um,
to bring 160 new women each year onto
our nomination service.
So that's really wanting to bring in, um, upcoming talent,
diverse talent to grow and expand that.
So, um, at one level you can see that as a bit of an, um,
input measure, but it will flow through, we hope
to really strong appointments into, um, a range of roles.
Um, I think that going forward, um, another area
that we really want to, um, continue to hone in on is
with the, all of the work we've done about gender pay gap
reporting, how we really see that through, um,
conversations, which I've had with, um,
colleagues from the office of the auditor general.
Um, you know, they've talked about the, the, um, role
that the, um, the global, um,
New Zealand gender pay gap rate could pay there,
but there might be some further ones
that we could look to expand.
Um, so for, for us, we really want to, um, have measures
that are meaningful, that speak to what we are here
to deliver, and also so
that you can hold us to account for that.
We are all here because we wanna make a difference, um,
to women and girls, and we wanna be working on the things
that are really gonna shift the dial for them.
And getting the, getting a strong, robust
building on the measures that we've als already got,
I think is really important there.
And so where, where success depends on other
agencies or organizations.
How does the ministry measure its influence
and contribution of its work?
It, it's quite, um, it, that's quite a complicated area
and there's that whole debate about attribution
and how you can work through that
and what you can kind of, I guess, claim as a win.
And I think for us, when we think about that,
about our work across the system
and how we manage, manage our impact, uh,
it's quite difficult I think to, to really tell
or explain that in a tangible way.
Mm-hmm. Um, nonetheless, it's not something
that we shouldn't consider or sorry, keep working on
and try to unpick to learn from others to talk with others.
Um, like I say, I don't think we're on our own in the, um,
the challenge to find the best measures that we can
or on our own in terms
of the determination to try and do that.
That is, um, we, I spoke at the
beginning. It was an hour we
Had with you, not half an hour, but we are at an hour now.
Thank you very much for discussion this afternoon.
Thank you very much.